Overhaul audio section (#350)
gbdev/pandocs: src/Audio_details.md

The digital value produced by the generator, which ranges between $0 and $F (0 and 15), is linearly translated by the DAC into an analog[^digital_analog] value between -1 and 1 (the unit is arbitrary).

The four analog channel outputs are then fed into the mixer[^vin], which selectively adds them (depending on [`NR51`](<#FF25 — NR51: Sound panning>)) into two analog outputs (Left and Right).
Thus, the analog range of those outputs is 4× that of each channel, -4 to 4.

Then, both of these two get their respective volume scaled, once from [`NR50`](<#FF24 — NR50: Master volume & VIN panning>), and once from the volume knob (if the console has one).
Note that the former step never mutes a non-silent input, but the latter can.

Each of the two analog outputs then goes through a [high-pass filter](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/High-pass_filter) (HPF).
For short, a HPF constantly tries to "pull" the signal towards analog 0 (neutral); the reason for that is explained further below.

[^digital_analog]:

> To be clear: digital values are discrete and clear-cut; conversely, the analog domain is continuous.

Reviewer: I feel like this clarification shouldn't be here. Maybe it's something we can add to an initial glossary/list of necessary concepts needed to read Pan Docs?

Author: Sure, but this PR has waited long enough that I don't want it to become blocked by #194 (which itself has been twiddling its thumbs for a long while now).

Reviewer: Added to that issue

The former is what computers use, the latter is what the real world is made of.

[^vin]:
Actually, VIN acts as a 5<sup>th</sup> channel fed into the mixer, whose control bits are in NR50 instead of NR51.
This was omitted from the diagram for simplicity.

## PCM registers

> These two registers, only present in the Game Boy Color and ulterior models, allow reading the output of the generation circuits directly; this is very useful for testing "internal" APU behavior.

Reviewer: What is "ulterior" here? Do you mean from more recent than GBC? Maybe "further" models?

Author: Yes, this is what I meant; however, "further" would be incorrect here.

Reviewer: "more recent"?

Reviewer: "following"?

Author: Either "more recent" or "later", I'd say.

Reviewer: "later model" works for me too

> These registers are not documented in any known Nintendo manual.

Reviewer: What is the purpose of this line? If we specify here should we do it elsewhere through the document as well?

Author: Pan Docs currently does not document any such registers [besides these](https://gbdev.io/pandocs/CGB_Registers.html#undocumented-registers), which I am lifting PCMxx from. The line's purpose is to give context, explain why no commercial software uses it, etc. They might be debugging leftovers, for all we know.

### FF76 — PCM12 (CGB Mode only): Digital outputs 1 & 2 \[read-only\]

The low nibble is a copy of sound channel 1's digital output, the high nibble a copy of sound channel 2's.

### FF77 — PCM34 (CGB Mode only): Digital outputs 3 & 4 \[read-only\]

Same, but with channels 3 and 4.

## Finer technical explanation

### DIV-APU

A "DIV-APU" counter is increased every time `DIV`'s bit 4 (5 in [double-speed mode](<#FF4D — KEY1 (CGB Mode only): Prepare speed switch>)) goes from 1 to 0, therefore at a frequency of 512 Hz (regardless of whether double-speed is active).
Thus, the counter can be made to increase faster by writing to `DIV` while its relevant bit is set (which clears `DIV`, and triggers the falling edge).

> Some events are tied to the DIV-APU counter:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The rate of the following events are tied to the DIV-APU counter:
```

Author: It's not just the rate, it's their occurrence. Repeatedly writing to DIV allows triggering them irregularly, or not at all.

Reviewer: Which is what rate conveys here. If I understand this correctly, it's not really "irregular", it's still every *N* ticks. Then the fact that those ticks can happen or not it's a separate concept. The event A is still going to have a rate of 1/N DIV-APU ticks.

Author: ```suggestion
The following events occur every <var>N</var> DIV-APU ticks:
```
Then we'd replace the "Every N ticks" column header with "Rate".

Reviewer: It sounds better to me

> Event          | Every N ticks | Frequency[^div_apu_freq]

Reviewer: I feel like there is a better way to word "Every N ticks" but can't come up with one right now

Author: In theory, "Period (ticks)", but I avoided it because I'm pretty sure it would be more confusing.

---------------|---------------|-------------------------
Envelope sweep | 8             | 64 Hz
Sound length   | 2             | 256 Hz
CH1 freq sweep | 4             | 128 Hz

[^div_apu_freq]:
Indicated values are under normal operation; the frequencies will obviously differ if writing to `DIV` to increase the counter faster.

### Mixer

A high-pass filter (HPF) removes constant biases over time.

> The HPFs therefore remove the DC offset created by inactive channels with an enabled DAC, and off-center waveforms.

Reviewer: How we moved from a single HPF to more than one? Should this be clarified?

Author: There have always been two HPFs, as per the diagram.

> Enabling or disabling a DAC ([see below](#DACs)), adding or removing it using NR51, or changing the volume in NR50, will cause an audio pop.

Reviewer: What do you mean here with "audio pop"?

Author: An audio... "pop"! It's a sound.

(All of these actions cause a change in DC offset, which is smoothed out by the HPFs over time, but still creates a pop.)

> The HPF is more aggressive on GBA than on GBC, which itself is more aggressive than on DMG.

Reviewer: This should be reworded in a way that doesn't require the explanation of what it means to be aggressive *afterwards*.

Author: That would break the flow of the comparison and make it hard to read. Introducing the concept first would be confusing, as in "why am I being explained this?".

(The more "aggressive" a HPF, the faster it pulls the signal towards "analog 0"; this reduces the pops, but tends to also distort waveforms.)

### DACs

Channel <var>x</var>'s DAC is enabled if and only if `[NRx2] & $F8 != 0`; the exception is CH3, whose DAC is directly controlled by bit 7 of NR30 instead.
Note that the envelope functionality changes the volume, but not the value stored in NRx2, and thus doesn't disable the DACs.

> If a DAC is enabled, the digital range $0 to $F is lineraly translated to the analog range -1 to 1, in arbitrary units.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a DAC is enabled, the digital range $0 to $F is linearly translated to the analog range -1 to 1, in arbitrary units.
```

> If a DAC is enabled, the digital range $0 to $F is lineraly translated to the analog range -1 to 1, in arbitrary units.

Reviewer: What does "in arbitrary units" wants to communicate here? Aren't we in arbitrary units already in the digital range?

Author: Yes, but those are different unary units, and the usual unit for analog signals is volts, and we don't want to imply that sound ranges from -1 V to 1 V. I'm not sure the exact values are known, and they would muddy the actual explanations throughout the page.

Reviewer: I don't see V specified anywhere else here when speaking about analog ranges and/or signals. I think it's clear enough to refer to them without specifying units.

Author: When reading documents just stating values without units, I default to assuming that it's a typo/oversight, and try to figure out what the unit is. Saying it explicitly clears that up.

Importantly, the slope is negative: "digital 0" maps to "analog 1", not "analog -1".

If a DAC is disabled, it fades to an analog value of 0.
The nature of this fade is not entirely deterministic and varies between models.

NR52's low 4 bits report whether the channels are turned on, not their DACs.

### Channels

A channel is activated by a write to NRx4's MSB, unless its DAC is off, which forces it to be disabled as well.
The opposite is not true, however: a disabled channel outputs 0, which an enabled DAC will dutifully convert into "analog 1".

> A channel can be deactivated in one of the following ways:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A channel is deactivated in the following cases:
```

Author: I'm trying to say that the list is exhaustive;

> - Turning off its DAC

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Its DAC is turned off
```

> - Its [length timer](<#Length timer>) expiring

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Its [length timer](<#Length timer>) expires
```

> - (CH1 only) [Frequency sweep](<#FF10 — NR10: Channel 1 sweep>) overflowing the frequency

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- (CH1 only) The [Frequency sweep](<#FF10 — NR10: Channel 1 sweep>) overflows the frequency
```

### Pulse channels (CH1, CH2)

> Each pulse channel has an internal "duty step" counter, which is used to index into [the selected waveform](<#FF11 — NR11: Channel 1 length timer & duty cycle>) (each background stripe corresponds to one "duty step")[^pulse_lut].

Reviewer: This doesn't read very well.. The internal counter is used to index (what?) into a waveform? What does it mean to index into a waveform?

Author: The "waveform" here is meant as an array of booleans, which is being indexed into.

Reviewer: How is the counter influencing / "being indexed into" the waveform? Are you trying to say that it's being "encoded" in array used to generate the waveform?

Author: The waveform SVGs have stripes in the background, which are meant to indicate what the waveform's state is based on that "duty step"/phase counter. 0 being leftmost.

Retriggering a pulse channel causes its "duty step timer" to reset, thus retriggering a pulse channel often enough will cause its "duty step" to never advance.

When first starting up a pulse channel, it will *always* output a (digital) zero.

[^pulse_lut]:
Actually, there is not LUT, but the manipulations done to the counter's bits are equivalent.

### Wave channel (CH3)

CH3 has an internal "sample index" counter.
Each time it is ticked (as determined by the "wavelength" in NR33/NR34), that "sample index" is incremented, and then the corresponding "sample" (nibble) is read from wave RAM.
(This means that sample #0 is skipped when first starting up CH3.)

CH3 does not emit samples directly, but stores every sample read into a buffer, and emits that continuously; (re)triggering the channel does *not* clear nor refresh this buffer, so the last sample ever read will be emitted again.
This buffer *is* cleared when turning the APU on, so CH3 will emit a "digital 0" when first powered on.

CH3 output level control does not, in fact, alter the output level.
It shifts the **digital** value CH3 is outputting, not the analog value.

> This only matters when changing the setting mid-playback: the digital values being shifted bias them towards 0, which biases the analog output towards "1"; the HPF will smooth this over time, but not instantly.

Reviewer: I'm not super sure about how we are using `bias` as a verb here. We should try to find something more technical.

Author: I believe "to bias" is a verb used fairly often in signal processing.

::: tip Lock-up

If the "active" portion of the LFSR only contains "1" bits, only "1" bits will be generated; this prevents CH4 from ever changing values (until retriggered), essentially silencing it.

This does not happen under regular operation, but can be achieved by switching from 15-bit to 7-bit mode when the LFSR's bottom 7 bits are all "1"s (which occurs relatively early after triggering the channel, for example).

:::

## Game Boy Advance audio

The APU was reworked pretty heavily for the GBA, which introduces some slightly different behavior:
- Instead of mixing being done analogically, it's instead done digitally; then, sound is converted to an analog signal and an offset is added (see `SOUNDBIAS` in [GBATEK](http://problemkaputt.de/gbatek.htm#gbasoundcontrolregisters) for more details).
- This also means that the GBA APU has no DACs.
  Instead, they are emulated digitally such that a disabled "DAC" behaves like an enabled DAC receiving 0 as its input.
- Additionally, CH3's DAC has its output inverted.
  In particular, this causes the channel to emit a loud spike when disabled; therefore, it's a good idea to "disconnect" the channel using NR51 before accessing wave RAM.

> None of the "enhanced" features (more wave RAM, digital FIFOs, etc.) are available to CGB programs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
None of the additional features (more wave RAM, digital FIFOs, etc.) are available to CGB programs.
```
